Good afternoon, everyone.
Oh, good afternoon, Mr. Thatcher.
We look forward to your five minute presentation.
We've, um, got your written submission here,
Right? Um,
yes, thank you for this opportunity.
Uh, my name's a thacher. I'm, I'm from Taranaki.
I'm also, I'm chair
of a little NGO called Tara Energy Watch.
Um, I just, I just find that curious, this piece
of legislation coming from a party, which is, um,
promoting freedom of choice
and minimal government interference in business.
Um, but I, I just thought I'd, um,
just brief the committee just very briefly on,
on the taranaki situation as far as oil
and gas is concerned.
Uh, and although there's been really extensive exploration
over the years, including, um, uh, drilling
and seismic surveys across the whole province in the seabed,
there's been no significant gas fines, um, since po Kura,
which was 25 years ago now.
Um, yeah, sure, there's, you know, small gas pockets here
and there, and, uh, but in the last 15
or so years, probably 90% of the drilling has occurred in,
in fields, um, in, in existing fields.
So just to put it simply, by 2030,
there'll be insufficient gas for, um,
any petrochemical industry.
And, uh, um,
and probably not an awful lot for electricity generation.
Successive governments have really failed to, uh,
address the situation
and the current policy of subsidizing, uh, drill
and hope, I'm afraid, is doomed to fail.
Um, just while we're talking of subsidies, methane Xs,
by far and away the largest consumer of gas, uh, it
pays very little in, um, for that gas,
and it gets free carbon units, um,
$60 million worth in in 2023.
Currently, it's, um, it's shut down one train
so it can onsell its gas, uh, its gas allocations,
and, um, because it can actually make more money from
selling gas than it can from, from producing methanol.
The carbon liability goes along with the gas, of course,
but methane X gets to keep its free carbon units.
Uh, that's pretty good deal for them, eh?
Mm-hmm. Methodex also pays pretty nominal amount of,
of corporate tax.
And in fact, for the first 20 years of its operations,
it paid no tax at all.
Is this really the sort of company we should be supporting?
Because, um, and coal mining, copper companies, of course,
operate the same way.
So who's this legislation actually aimed at?
Um, the Aussie banks, they're quite happy to,
uh, finance fossil fuel projects.
The three New Zealand banks, New Zealand owned banks,
so they're, they're pretty small.
You know, that's Kiwi Bank, cooperative Bank
and TSP, they're really too small to take a risk on
what if is effectively a sunset industry.
So the aim of the legislation, I don't know, perhaps
it is actually there to, um, try
and force banks to lower their interest rates
for fossil fuel projects.
That's a possibility. Um,
and as far as the coal industry is concerned, um,
Mr. Foster, when he, uh, gave his initial speech
to Parliament, when introducing this bill,
it appears he has, um, shall we say, a little bit
of a limited understanding
of the coal industry in New Zealand.
It's, uh, the majority of, of, of high quality,
majority of coal in New Zealand, that's mine in New Zealand,
is exported because it's high quality stuff,
and you can't actually get high quality coal in New Zealand.
Um, just if you don't believe me,
just ask the chief engineer
of the S law speak, Mr.
Mr. Thatcher, I'll just get you to, um,
wind up in the last minute.
And I, I wanna give the,
we've got the sponsor here, Mr. Foster.
Um, I wanna give him at least right
of reply whether he takes the visa or not.
Fair Enough. 'cause he seems to have been enjoying
some of your claims, so that's good. Oh,
Immensely.
I didn't, didn't think we were in the finance committee.
Well, you know, it's all money. Another one. Um, yeah.
Uh, and the, the, the export industry, of course is, uh, is,
is completely controlled by foreign companies,
and they operate very much like meth X, you know,
they pay hardly anything in,
in terms of royalties and taxes.
Uh, and really should we be supporting these companies,
they are, after all exploiting, um,
a very valuable national resource,
and we get very little benefit from it.
Okay. We'll leave it there.
Um, Mr. Foster, did you want to add any comments or,
or make any corrections on any assumptions
that may have been directed towards you?
Look, the only, the only thing I would say, Alan,
it's very interesting, and it would be nice
to have another conversation about this,
but I suspect it might be better directed to the, uh,
transport and infrastructure, um, select committee, which,
um, also looks after energy, which I happen
to chair rather than the finance and expenditure committee.
Well, there you go. I think, I think
that's an open invitation, Alan, to, uh,
to put a delegation there at some point,
at some appropriate time
If we have time.
Absolutely. Okay. Oh, well, thank you, Alan.
You've made yourself loud and clear.
We appreciate your submission
and, um, coming to us from the Energy Province
of Taranaki today.
Thanks, Alan. Thanks, Alan. Very good. Thanks, guys. Okay.
Uh, now Clark, have we got our next group up, the lawyers
for, um, climate Action NZ Incorporated?
Yes, they're on the room. We've got Molly McDowell here
in the Zoom room, I should say.
Yes, they're here. And Jessica Palette. Okay.
Okay. This is a 10 minute submission team.
Good afternoon. It'll be good to keep. Good,
Good afternoon. Thank
you. Thank you for joining us this afternoon.
Um, you've got 10 minutes.
If you can leave us with a little bit of opportunity
for questions at the end, that would be great.
So we're in your hands. Thank you.
Thank you. Will do just that.
Um, firstly, thank you very much for the opportunity
to present on this important bill.
Uh, so my name is Jessica Ery.
I am Executive director at Lawyers for Climate Action,
and I'm joined by Molly McDowell, uh, solicitor, uh,
lawyers for Climate Action.
And what we'll do today is make three points really related
to the climate, uh, risks associated with this bill.
The first point is that climate risks are financial risks,
and the government should not be intervening in the
legitimate commercial judgment of financial institutions
and weighing up those risks.
We don't think the government has a role
to play in interfering there.
The second is that the real impact of this bill will be
to increase uncertainty
and actually litigation risk for lenders, given the, um,
current drafting of the legislation.
And we also think that it can sends both concerning,
but actually also conflicting messages
to New Zealand businesses, um, from the government.
And we'll talk through some
of the ways in which it's doing that.
The third is that actually the bill is unworkable.
Um, this isn't a de banking bill.
This is actually a very broad bill that applies
to any decision
to treat consumers less favorably in the provision
of any financial services.
So the broad design of that bill, um, is also incredibly,
um, concerning and could be really harmful.
I'll start by passing over to Molly
to talk about climate risks as financial risks.
Kia, the bill you're considering
is based on a false premise.
The ESG factors are to quote the explanatory note,
murky environmental, social,
or governance moralizing
that are not legitimate commercial risks.
When we turn to climate change, specifically,
the global consensus is clear.
Climate change is a financial risk.
It's a fundamental issue for businesses
and financial institutions worldwide.
Think about physical risks, including damage
to infrastructure from rising sea levels
and supply chain disruptions due to increased storm events.
These are not future possibilities
that are happening right now.
As the parliamentary commissioner
for the environment has said, the physical risks posed
by climate change are certain it's just a matter of degree.
Then there are the transition risks,
including stranded assets, reputational
and litigation risks.
It's an uncontroversial fact
that financial institutions must respond to these risks
to protect their own long-term
viability and that of their clients.
We saw this with the Net zero Banking Alliance,
which some banks have now withdrawn from the alliance,
and the alliance itself has caused its operations.
While this might look like banks caving
to political pressure, when you look under the hood,
it is clear that their un, that their underlying practices
and direction of travel are not changing.
Why? Because climate risk is a financial risk.
As Barclays stated, after withdrawing, they remain committed
to being a net zero bank by 2050.
Similarly, HSBC said it remains result resolute in
its long-term ambition.
Dame three Welsh put it best at the Climate Change
and Business Conference last week, where she said,
if you try to do business without being cognizant
of climate change, you will fail.
If you haven't failed today, you will fail in the future.
Climate risks are financial risks, not ideology,
and the government shouldn't stand in the way
of financial institutions using their commercial judgment.
Thanks, Molly. The next point we want to discuss is
what the real impact of this bill will be.
And I think the first point to note is, of course,
directors already have duties to act in
what they believe the best interest of the company are.
Um, to that extent
that we think the bill is, is unnecessary.
But I want to touch on three particular impacts of the bill.
So one is the potential for it to increase litigation risk,
actually on the providers of financial, um, of, of,
of financial products and services.
What is a valid and verifiable commercial reason?
Is verifiable something that it has to be capable
of verification or something that the bank then needs
to jump through lots of hoops, um,
and provide proof for, um, in order to support that?
I think it's important to note
that there is an increase internationally in what's called
ESG backlash litigation.
And so it's not that difficult to imagine those who think
that they've been treated unfairly
by a financial institution actually complaining
and trying to raise those issues.
And at its heart gonna increase an awful lot of uncertainty.
I see some questions coming, coming through.
Um, do you want us to respond to those now or No? You
Fin you finish off as long, as long as you, um,
wind it up in a say two
or three minutes, that'll be good. We'll go to questions.
Sure. I think the next point that's important to note is
that it's actually sending really conflicting signals
to business New Zealand.
Last week, the Climate Change Minister stood up at the
Climate Change Business Conference
and said that the private sector needs to step up
and help to take the lead and the transition.
Yet the following week here we are talking about whether
to limit the ability of financial institutions to do just
that and not just limit the ability of them to do that,
but actually say that it's a criminal offense in order, um,
if, if you do not have a valid
and verifiable commercial reason
to make a lending decision based on climate risk.
For instance, on the criminal offense point, I also paused
to note that the New Zealand Law Society has raised real
issues with the actual drafting of the criminal offense,
which I think it's important for the committee, um,
to be cognizant of.
I mean, on the one hand we have a climate related
disclosures regime where the government requires, um,
financial or providers of financial services to identify
and consider climate related risks.
Yet on the other hand, this bill is then going
to potentially make it a criminal offense for them to act on
and, and respond to those risks conflicting signals
to the business community, um,
in a way which we think is really quite harmful.
And I'll pass, um, onto Molly to finish off our submission.
Uh, look, the bill as drafted currently contains a variety
of flaws that will make it both unworkable
and lead to unintended consequences as just two examples.
Um, the first being that the bill relies on the existing
definition of financial institutions
capturing a huge array of actors.
While the explanatory note ENT title refer to de banking,
the current drafting captures insurers, for example,
which I hear was clarified last week,
that this was intentional.
This bill is an entirely inappropriate vehicle to deal
with the complex and evolving relationship
between climate change adaptation and the insurance sector.
We need a clear evidence-based approach,
not a haphazard attempt.
Second, the bill's proposed positive obligation
to provide services and its prohibition on treating
customers less favorably based on ESG factors could have a
chilling effect on innovation
and targeted support that we are seeing.
For example, A SB has introduced a new 0% solar alone aimed
at helping farmers secure long-term
energy resilience and cost savings.
Minister WATS stated that initiatives like this would help
set the farming sector up for long-term success,
putting the issue of the definition of consumers
to one side under this bill.
Initiatives like this, which provide targeted support
for the farming industry could be seen
as treating non-farming customers
or other industries less favorably,
potentially engaging the causes of this bill.
This creates a real risk
of a chilling effect on positive initiatives like this
and provides an additional unnecessary layer of bureaucracy
and uncertainty for financial institutions when
responding to consumer demand.
And I guess the final point here is
that the word limited scope of this bill are so wide
and imprecise that it will be unworkable in practice.
Should this bill proceed, we would recommend referring
to the New Zealand Law Society submission
and their targeted amendments suggested.
Okay, thank you very much. We're gonna go
to Todd Stevenson Act MP first.
Sorry, Todd, we can't hear. Oh, Todd,
Are you off mute?
Is that better? Yep, that's it. We can hear you.
Sorry, my settings weren't quite right.
Thanks for your submission
and, um, your points are well made around the scope
and the criminal penalties.
I just wanted to draw your attention
'cause you said it both in your submission
and in your written submission.
This isn't a government bill.
Um, and you just noted in your submission
and you said it now that, um, that yeah, just wanted to,
'cause I know you, I'm sure you're, um, keen on accuracy,
but this is a private member's bill, obviously.
Um, so I just wanted to clear that up.
But, so thanks for your submissions
and I think some of the points I've
heard from other submitters. So thank you.
Thank you. And I, I appreciate that clarification.
Um, and in some ways I think, I think it's helpful
because one of the concerning things,
as I noticed was the different signals that this could send.
So I think that is a really
important clarification. Thank you.
Yeah, no, thanks for that, Todd.
And it is important, um,
because with private members bills also the sponsor doesn't
get that departmental ministerial support, uh, as much
as a government bill.
And so we really appreciate the advice coming in from
experts, um, you know, across the board,
uh, come submissions.
I'm gonna go to the sponsor, Andy Foster.
Yeah, look, thank you for the submission
and, uh, thanks Cam for the, uh, um, clarification there
as well about, uh, the, um, the, you know, private members.
Bill doesn't have the same sort of, um, uh, support as, uh,
does, um, a government bill.
Two questions though. The first one of them is, um,
you mentioned, um, ESG backlash litigation as something
that's obviously already happening now.
Dunno which way round that is.
There's people complaining that banks are banking, uh,
providing banking services to organizations.
Some people disapprove of or the opposite.
Uh, so if you can clarify that, the other one is
that we had some, um, submissions that are saying that, uh,
at very least greater transparency when a, uh,
when banking services are declined, um,
at least greater transparency from the, uh,
financial institution to the, um, party
that's had their banking services declined,
would be a useful step forward.
Uh, and if I can just also, um,
you also mentioned climate related disclosures.
Uh, there is another bill in the ballot, um, actually from,
um, from the ACT party, uh, from Mark Cameron,
which I think goes to that issue of, um,
of climate disclosure.
So, you know, we, we see where that, we'll see where that,
um, where that gets to whether it gets pulled from ballot.
But, uh, a couple of questions there. Yeah, happy
To respond. So on
ESG backlash litigation, this is an increasing trend,
um, internationally,
and I don't know if there have been any cases
specifically against banks in relation to de banking,
but the idea is when companies
or company directors take climate into account
and an applicant plaintiff disagrees with that.
Um, and so that's why it's called anti ESG litigation. Oh,
So it's anti SG. Okay.
Right. Thank you. Yeah,
Exactly. Um, greater
transparency, I think that's something, I mean,
to the extent that this is a problem that needs to be solved
through pieces of legislation, um, I think that a,
a softer approach such as requiring greater explanations
or transparency from a financial institution would be
a good middle ground.
Um, and finally, in relation to climate related disclosures,
I just paused to note that New Zealand has a world leading
climate related disclosures regime.
We have about 200 entities that apply, um,
and come under that regime.
It's incredibly powerful
and a lot of resources already been spent
by New Zealand's biggest companies
getting that thing underway.
Um, and so I think we need to make sure
that our laws are consistent
with it rather than actually undercutting it.
Um, and it's a fantastic way in which New Zealand
is, is, is leading.
So we are strong supporters of that, uh, regime.
I I think that's part of the issue is there's a huge cost
in in doing that.
And that's where we do hear some con
concerns. But anyway, I'll leave it there.
Okay. We'll just have a, um, a quick interaction, uh,
if we can Dr. David Wilson.
Yeah, I won't take long. Thanks, Cameron.
Um, thank you very, very much.
Lawyers for Employment Action New Zealand Inc.
Um, the, let me tell you that there are some people
that are very concerned that there is not much relationship
between ESG considerations and risk.
Um, we heard from federated farmers.
Along those lines, we've also heard from transport those
that are supporting, uh, petrol stations, et cetera.
And I think that's the kind of at the core of this.
So just wondering whether
or not, um, you've got any comment for that.
Yeah, absolutely. And I'm happy
to pass to Molly for this as well.
Um, but I mean, I think you should probably listen
to the financial institutions.
We know you had Westpac on this morning talking about,
for example, the, the risks that, that you see, um,
between climate and, um, potential financial risks.
And some of them, frankly, are, are kind of obvious.
I mean, physical risk of their sea level rise
that then impacts, um, you know, an airport runway, that
that's just a, a physical risk, which,
which may happen if sea level rises in the way
that scientists say that they will.
I think that the scientific consensus on potential impacts
is really, really clear.
And at the end of the day, the role of government should be
to actually stand to the side and let the financial
institutions who have access to the best data
and best information of this should let them do their job
and, and weigh those risks up the way that they see fit.
Okay, we're just gonna have to leave it there.
We are, we're over time now,
but we've had a really good interaction.
We appreciate your submission, both written and verbal,
and wish you well the rest of the day. So you, thank you
Very much, Kaki. Thank
you, Molly. Thank you, Jessica.
Okay, now that takes us to a five minute submission, uh,
from, um, Ben Neville.
Have we got him up? Mr. Clark?
Kra. Kra, can you hear me? Yes. Welcome Ben. Why
Thank you. Um,
Okay, we've got, we've got five minutes.
We've got your written submission here.
If you wanna leave a little bit of time for questions,
that would be helpful too,
but we're in your hands, so thank you for joining us.
Uh, my pleasure. Uh, uh, I don't, uh,
have a particularly detailed submission to make.
I was, I, I put my written submission in
because at the time that this bill was announced,
I just thought it was really strange and unusual Bill.
Uh, but I've decided, uh, since then to focus, uh,
I've been thinking about how I would present my submission
and what I would present on.
And it just struck me the other day when I was watching the
news, watching the, uh, violence and pro
and riots in Cape Mandu.
Uh, which I think in a lot
of ways came from the general public being disenfranchised
and concerned about corruption in government.
When I see that, I see that is what happens when a,
the general public is excluded from
the safety valves, uh,
which are built into our system currently,
which allow the public to, uh, try
and change the direction of government of, uh, of companies
and, um, of policies through, uh, protest action.
What I see, uh, my, my lens on this is
that currently there's been a number of protests
outside a NZ banks trying to get them to divest from, uh,
fossil fuel, um, uh, uh, companies.
And I see that as a legitimate form of protest, which is,
uh, which is the general public trying to move, uh,
the needle or have some influence over, um, society.
And I just feel that this bill, uh, effectively removes
that ability for protestors to protest in a way to,
that could influence, uh, the finance industry, uh,
in a way which is, uh, gives voice
to the general public in a way that makes 'em feel
that they can influence society.
And I feel that this bill closes down
that ability in such a blunt
and heavy handed nature, that it actually raises the risk
of people feeling so disenfranchised
and so unable to have an impact on their society,
that it may ultimately, if there are other, uh, aspects of
where, where similar things happen that people could say,
feel so disenfranchised, that it results in, um,
there'd been no safety valve
and, uh, the ultimate result being, uh,
a a disenfranchised general public
who feel they have no influence and
therefore must turn to rioting or, or,
or damage which no one wants.
So I, I just find that this bill, uh,
really quite a perverse bill
that really could have implications far beyond
just the finance industry.
It really could strike at people's sense of
participatory democracy is so blunt, uh, uh, that I, uh,
submit that it should not proceed on that basis.
And that's really all I have to say.
Okay. That's loud and clear. Ben.
I'm going to go to Todd Stevenson who had his hand up
First. Thanks, Ben, for your
submission.
Sorry, can you specifically, I'm sorry, a little confused.
What specifically about the bill you think is gonna stop the
Ities people's ability to protest or,
Well, what I, people are currently protesting
against banks like the NZ bank asking them
to divest from fossil fuel companies.
And that is, I think, a legitimate for protest,
which gives them some agency over this climate change issue,
which is, there's a lot of concern in society about
how we are responding or not responding to climate change.
And that pen up concern, they're able to event that
by doing something which they see as effective
or potentially effective by protesting outside a NZ banks
to get them to divest.
Now, this bill would effectively prevent a NZ bank from
divesting from fossil fuel companies on the basis
of climate change related dangers.
I think that leaves people with a sense
that they have no agency over, uh, the way things are going.
And I think that's dangerous.
Thank you. That's a bit clearer
because I just didn't want people to be left
with the impression that this somehow interfered
with people's, uh, right.
To protest or have their voices heard.
Thank you. Okay. Yeah.
Yeah. Fair enough. Thank you, Todd.
I'm gonna go to the sponsor. Andy Foster.
Yeah, look, I think, thanks Ben
for the, um, for the submission.
Um, it was an interesting argument
because we've had quite a number of people saying
that government has no agency in,
in any way affecting the financial decisions that are made,
the commercial decisions that are made by banks,
and that they have a, um, a requirement
to act in the best interests of,
you know, of the company, et cetera.
The directors have, uh, requirements to do that.
Um, but what you're kind of arguing is that the,
there should be the ability for some members of the public,
and we know that public always has a, a range
of different views on pretty well everything.
Um, to be able to try
and pressure banks to, to make a decision, which
probably also is not in the commercial interests of,
of the bank or not a, not a commercial decision.
Got any view on that?
It's, it just feels like it's two, two people trying
to beat the banks up from either side, which they're big.
I know they're big enough and ugly enough.
But, um, just interested in your views on that.
Are you saying you're, you'd like me to discuss
why some people saying the government shouldn't try
and influence banks, but I'm saying the parliament should
be able to influence them?
No, I think you were saying that they,
that some protest actions should be able to influence them.
Yeah, I'm just, and
and neither of those are commercial,
are commercial in their, in their nature.
And that's, that's the thing
a lot of people have been talking about.
Right. But I see the protest action
as being commercial in nature,
and that if enough people protest, the banks will see
that it's an against the commercial imperative to continue
to fund fossil fuels so that they would step away from it.
So I, I think the mechanism is protest,
but the effect would be commercial through, uh, uh,
commercial impact on the banks through, um, you know,
perhaps image and, uh,
but also maybe people divesting actually closing their
accounts and in protest.
Okay. We, we will, we'll have to leave it there,
but thank you, Ben, for giving us your time
and for your written submission.
Okay. And, uh, appreciate it
and enjoy the rest of your day. Thank you for coming in.
Thanks a lot. Okay.
Now we've got, um, Theresa de uh, Davenport, uh,
queued up for a five minute presentation.
She's made a relatively, uh, succinct
and straightforward, um, written submission,
so we look forward to her, um,
oral presentation. Theresa, are you there?
Yes, I am. Can you hear me? Yes. Okay.
Oh, Hello. Thank you for your,
thank you for your submission.
If you are able to elaborate on some
of your comments, that would be great.
Uh, you've got five minutes.
Yeah. So, um,
I think it should be people's individual's decision.
Like the individual's decision, whether they would like
to choose a bank that is more ethical
or they can choose that it's not, um, in my opinion, people
are able to make their own decision if they're
in whatever, you know, a lot of people decide
that they wanna choose money over ethical investing,
and that's, that's their decision.
In my opinion. I would always choose an ethical investment,
but I don't understand why we are trying to
stop people doing right by society.
Um, to me, we're hurtling towards a climate disaster.
Um, there are numerous studies that show
that we're 1.5 degree of warning,
and our world is only just starting
to feel the repercussions of this.
And to me, the long-term financial repercussions of
trying to, um, invest, trying
to tell people what they should invest in
and what, yeah, trying to, trying
to make banks invest in things that don't account
for environmental, social,
and governance analysts is, is actually
worse in the long term
because it is going to be more expensive for us, um, to
the adaptation if rather than if we mitigate.
Um, and I feel like this bill actually creates a
lot of red tape for these banks.
So they have to complete complex compliance burdens
and have additional regulation that does not
to me address any identifiable issue that is important.
Um, yeah.
And the censoring of social governance
and analysts would actually harm the customer.
As I said before, banks
and insurers, um, are trying to avoid risks where they can,
um, including climate related natural
disasters and poor governments.
And this allows, um, us to,
uh, for customers,
like it doesn't actually advantage them.
'cause the long term risk of
investing in these fossil fuel companies
or these, these companies that are not doing good
and ethically by society to me, is actually
more harmful in the long term.
Um, yeah. Um, those are my main points.
To be honest. I can't really remember what I wrote down.
I just kind of, I, so I dunno if
that aligned with what I wrote.
I couldn't find what I wrote. I tried. Um, but that's okay.
Yeah. Yeah. No, that's all right.
You've made your, um, position, uh, pretty clear in your,
uh, written submission, Teresa, as you have, um, Theresa
as you have today.
Any questions members? We've got a minute if there is,
or points of clarification for Theresa.
No, I think it's all been said loud
and clear, so thanks for coming into the committee today
and, um, uh, online and, um, giving your presentation.
Thank you. Cheer. Thank you. Okay.
That takes us to, um, uh, Richard, uh,
Suge or Sue Gate.
Richard,
Can you hear me okay?
Uh, we can hear you. Are we meant to see you? It's all,
Uh, the video's on, oh, there you go.
There you go. We're away. Right? Okay.
You've got, um, you've got five minutes, Richard.
We're in your hands. Hopefully
leave us some time for your questions.
Yep. Thank you very much.
Um, I've spent about 40 years working in conservation
environmental areas, uh,
and probably about 30 being involved in climate campaigns.
Um, 'cause of my concern about climate change
and the need for government action to reduce the amount
of climate change that's happening
and reduce New Zealand contribution towards it.
Um, so that you can see where I'm coming from.
Um, when I first read the bill,
I really thought this was a bit of a joke.
Um, I still think it is a bit of a joke.
Um, it's just performative politics essentially.
Uh, it's, um, really not going to fly
because of the submissions you're gonna get against it
and already have received against it from, um, you know,
serious financial institutions who think it's a complete,
um, takeover of their right to make commercial decisions.
And that I think that the, the government can decide
what should be banks, financial institutions,
commercial decisions.
Um, to me is, is, is coming, is for,
coming from a very strange place.
Uh, we, we operate in a, um,
a neoliberal free market, um, in which, uh,
businesses can choose what they should invest in, uh,
and what their commercial activity is.
Uh, the next step from taking this particular approach
to be the government actually mandating
and requiring financial institutions to
actually provide services
or, uh, this is outside the scope of it,
but it's, it's, so you see where it's going to actually,
you know, provide, um, invest in certain ways
or companies to invest in certain ways.
Now, I'm not opposed to the government providing some degree
of incentive for certain actions
or some degree of regulation against certain actions,
but actually directing, you know, the commercial sector, um,
to actually support different types of activities, uh,
I personally think is a very dangerous slope.
Um, and it's something you'd expect from a society that is,
uh, more fascistic than neoliberal.
Um, I just really want to say that the other points
that has no doubt been raised that, uh,
this probably won't go down well if it was passed
with the free trade agreements, particularly the European
and the, um, UK free to train trade agreements that, um,
require the government to have support for, um,
the Paris agreement, uh, in passing.
I'll note that the proposal from the ACT party in
New Zealand first party withdraw from the, um,
Paris Agreement is sort of, uh, equally, um,
perplexing from that, that understanding.
Uh, I think this, uh, requiring banks to, um,
actually stop services, um,
against those important environmental matters that, um, uh,
do need to, um, be considered as risk matters
for those institutions, um, will actually just add
to their costs and add to immense confusion.
And so, um, in final, I just ask that the, uh,
national Enact mps, um, reject this piece of legislation if
for another reason, then it's fundamentally, um,
a against the neoliberal, um, market approach
that they take towards, uh,
running a business in New Zealand.
Thank you. I'll hear any questions. Okay.
Thank you. Uh, Richard, we're we're at time,
but I'll allow a question if there is a question
or point of clarity required.
Doesn't seem to be. So thank you, sir.
Thank you for coming in, making your points loud and clear
and thank you for your written submission as well.
Alright, thank you.
Thanks, Richard. Okay, now
have we got, um, uh, wellbeing Economy Alliance,
RT O here, Dr. Paul Darel Zeal,
uh, for a 10 minutes
Submission? Yeah. Um,
I'm submitting alongside Dr.
Zeal, so I'll kick off if that's okay. Oh,
Gareth, of course. Nice. See you
Again. Sorry,
I turned the page.
And there you are. So no, nice to see you
And former colleagues on the committee.
Lovely to see you too. On a beautiful Wellington Day.
Uh, so as you know, I'm Gareth Hughes, the Director
of the Wellbeing Economy Alliance Al Tie.
We're a non-partisan independent, think
and do tank working to redesign our tie's economy
around the wellbeing of people and planet.
We use an evidence-based informed approach to think upstream
to develop solutions for the public good.
We formed in our toyoto three years ago,
and we've recently published reports on a hundred policies
for local government, including 85 case studies
for the public good, uh, report on amplify
and Maori economic approaches.
And then a successful u eu, uh, UK,
US economic development strategy
called Community Wealth Building.
Uh, for us, a wellbeing economy puts human
and planetary needs at the center of activities, ensuring
to ensure these are achieved by design.
You may know some, know some of our global ambassadors,
Kate ETH from Oxford University, the author
of Donor Economics, Tim Jackson,
who is on Air New Zealand's advisory Board, Dr.
Katherine Trebek, Jason Hickle, and many others.
Uh, we really appreciate the opportunity
to make a submission on this member's bill today.
And for us, at the highest level, finance is a key part
of a healthy economy, and it's important
that we ensure finance can work in the interest
of future generation.
There's a huge, uh, widespread recognition
that climate change, uh, is a financial risk, both in terms
of adaptation, extreme weather events,
but also mitigation how we deal with the transition
to a low carbon economy.
If there's one report I could leave on the table with you,
if we are meeting in person, it's, uh, Institute
and faculty of Actuaries
who last year published a groundbreaking report.
These are the risk guys, risk guys
advising the insurance industry,
and they forecast we could be seeing a 50% loss in GDP
between 2070 and 2090,
unless immediate policy action is taken
to tackle the risks posed by climate change.
So that's the, the, the high level setting.
I'd like to pass to my colleague
Wheels research economist Dr.
Ziel, to go through the substantive points. Koto,
Gareth
Maori.
Uh, hello David. Good to see you.
Congratulations on your new role.
And, uh, excited to see you playing a leadership, uh,
role in this country, uh,
with all your expertise and background.
Let me begin with four statements.
I think we'll find agreement around the table.
Uh, first, financial institutions make irreplaceable
contributions to the wellbeing of New Zealanders
young people saving for their first home workers, saving
for their retirement, small businesses accessing loans
to finance expansion.
New Zealanders require well-functioning financial
institutions at all stages of our lives.
Second, a key requirement
for a healthy financial institution is
that it's carefully designed internal systems.
And its skilled staff are able to analyze
and manage risk, not only
for each individual loan application,
but also for their total portfolio of loans.
Third, in their day-to-day business,
financial institutions have found connections
between certain features in a loan application
and the risk of failure in a business project.
And those considerations include what can be called
for convenience, environmental, social,
or governance considerations.
Fourth, the external reporting board publishes standards aim
to create a consistent framework for entities
to consider the climate related risks
and climate related opportunities
that climate change presents
for their activities over the short, medium, and long term.
Now, I come to a difference around the table globally,
the development of these tools and standards to evaluate
and manage risk is regarded as a good thing
directly contributing to the wellbeing of citizens
who need their savings to be invested wisely.
This bill, however, contains clauses
that prohibit certain considerations
and providing financial services to different customers.
These include any direct or indirect environmental, social
or governance consideration.
And another quote,
any climate related reporting standard issued
by the external reporting board.
These clauses were denied to the New Zealand institutions,
a standard practice available in other jurisdictions
to the detriment of the financial returns
to New Zealand savers.
There are exemptions,
but the bill provides no guidance on what is considered
to be a valid commercial reason.
And it provides no standard
for evaluating whether a commercial reason is verifiable.
Consequently, this intrusion on the day-to-day practice
of financial institutions must increase the costs
of financial intermediation.
I finished with an analogy.
Suppose I asked a mechanic to service my car.
Suppose when I picked up the car,
the mechanic said the service was complete,
but the overheating warning light kept lighting
up on the dashboard.
Knowing this would annoy me,
the mechanic disconnected the warning light.
This is what this bill requires financial institutions
to do, to disconnect the warning lights
that might come up in a standard ESG evaluation.
We all therefore recommends
that the select committee report back to parliament
that this bill should not proceed.
We're happy to answer any questions.
Okay, I'm gonna go to Dr. David Wilson, New Zealand first.
Good afternoon, professor and supervisor and mentor.
Um, Paul and Gareth.
Um, Paul, you headed up the A ERU,
the Agricultural Economic Research Unit at
Lincoln for many, many years.
And, um, we had, um, the feds talked to us today
and some research that they've done recently.
And what they said that, um, there was 70
to 75% support for the statement that
what they're confronting at the moment is intrusive
investigation into climate related risks.
On top of that, the climate related risks as assessed
by banks was variable and unconvincing in some some ways.
So you'll mention around standards is my
first little question.
And my second little question would be,
how then do we get transparency in terms
of the decision making?
Um, because I think that that's one of the biggest issues
that the Feds had was there was no very little
towards no relationship between the decision around ESG
and the acceptance
otherwise of their banking services, including lending.
Yes. Thanks David. Those are good questions.
When I was at the A ERU, one of the projects we did was
for Westpac who were concerned about how they could improve
their service to their customers
by making more transparent the risks
that they were taking upon themselves
through certain investment decisions and land use decisions.
And in all of that project, all
of the conversation from Westpac was
how can we improve our service to our customers
who are taking risks that they are not aware of?
And so the question you ask about transparency is
exactly the right question.
The wrong question is to say,
how can we stop the banks from providing this service?
Because anybody investing in a land-based
industry today needs to be aware of the risks
from extreme weather events, from greater drought periods,
from floodplains emerging from the nearby to river beds.
And so I think the, the conversation
that the federated farmers are wanting
to have is a really important conversation.
And my worry is that this bill would stop that conversation
by outlying outlawing certain activities
that the banks want to promote.
Thank you. Okay. Andy Foster.
Yeah, look, thank you. I wanted to go to that, um,
point about transparency as well.
'cause we've had a number of different, um,
submitters who've actually said
that more transparency would be quite a good idea.
Um, when, if a bank decides not to provide banking services
to some, to either to a, to a WOULDBE client, uh,
or to withdraw them from existing clients,
the impression we have is that, uh, the reasons for doing
that, if they are ESG reasons should really be spelled out,
uh, to the, um, uh, to the prospective client or the,
or the client that's going to be
have their services removed.
Um, do you seem to be in support of that, that kind
of proposition at very least?
Yes. Yes. Yeah, I think of the, the way in which the,
the banking ombudsman is empowered by the industry to
mediate complaints by customers when there
is a lack of transparency.
And it seems to be a pathway along that route
would be far more supportive to both the role
of financial intermediaries and their customers
and the desire by saving savers
to get a good return on their investment,
rather than threatening bank officers with the prospect
of three months imprisonment.
I I mean, the, the bank officers are gonna have
to be very cautious about anything they say.
And so that's sort of draconian penalty
would inhibit any genuine transparency from the banks
because of the risks that if somebody makes a mistake,
they could end up in court facing a prison term.
No, I understand the point you're making.
Um, the, the other thing you said there is that, um,
there's no guidance on
what is considered a valid commercial reason.
But I would've thought that banks are in that business
and they've been in that business since
most of 'em since they were founded.
Um, they, they'd be pretty solid on what they recogni
what they were considered to be as a, a commercial reason
and should be able to explain it, shouldn't they?
Well, I think you have just put out point extremely Well,
that is why we are opposed to this bill.
They, they can be trusted to make sound commercial
decisions, and the sector is sufficiently competitive
that if they fail to do so, they will lose business
and skilled staff to other institutions.
And one of the reasons for making this submission is
that we are concerned that Parliament is trying
to make commercial decisions on behalf of banks
by outlawing a particular type of decision
that in other jurisdictions are an important tool
for ensuring that financial intermediaries do their work
as efficiently and safely and responsibly as possible.
Oh, okay. Sorry. 'cause I thought you were criticizing the
bill for not providing guidance on
what the banks are very good at doing,
which is making commercial decisions.
That is the exemption clause.
But without that guidance,
it increases the uncertainty faced by financial institutions
who have to try and second guess what the
outside court is going
to decide is a valid commercial reason.
Okay. So in that setting, yes, I, I,
I do agree with your point. I think it is well made.
Thank you. Okay. Thank, thank you, Paul.
Thank you, Gareth. Thank you for your submission
and thanks for coming to the, uh, presenting
to the committee this afternoon.
You're welcome. Thanks very much. Okay. Thank you. Members.
We're gonna go to, um, a five minute, um,
individual submission from Jody Alice, who was, um,
scheduled for four o'clock.
So you might have to scroll down the page
to find Jody's submission.
Um, but we're able to squeeze her in now.
So, Jody, we're in your hands if you are there.
We're just bringing her in now, Mr. Chair.
Thank you,
Jody.
Hi. I'll be with you in a minute.
Thank you.
Um, I was actually expecting
to present my submission at four o'clock this
afternoon. Well,
If, if you'd prefer four o'clock.
Um, otherwise, if you're ready to go,
we just saw you were there,
and so we thought we'd grab you now, um,
while we still had a bit of capacity,
but if, if, if, if, if four o'clock suits you, then that's
what you're scheduled for, but, um,
Well, otherwise We're all ears.
Um, and, um,
I, I've been ill of that horrid cough that's going around,
so, um, having a coughing fit.
Um, I'll start my video now.
Um, yeah, I mean, I took,
I was just rather horrified, um,
as you probably saw in my submission, you know,
with everything that's been happening with the flooding in,
just to see that the government has come up with this, um,
frankly, scary piece of legislation that,
um, wants to be passed.
I just think it's condemning, you know, all our, I mean, I,
I'm a teacher, I've been teaching for 20 years,
and I was just reflecting on what
to say in the submission last night,
and I was just thinking of all the tam that I taught, um,
you know, know some of them were at preschool
and now I see them in the, um, high school
where I'm a teacher aide.
And it, it's just so hard for al Tamari.
I mean, it's hard for everybody,
but when I think back to when, when I was that age
looking at, um, the threat of, um, nuclear war,
um, that's what was happening in 1983.
And, you know, now these poor kids are having to deal
with the threat of climate change.
They're seeing the impact in their lives.
They've all just been through, um,
the Mor Wika river coupled where, where to, um,
flooding some of them have lost their houses.
Um, you know, we had to evacuate, as you saw in my,
um, submission.
I just, I just don't know Andy Foster, why you, uh,
even thinking of
presenting this,
this evil piece of legislation?
I just don't understand.
I mean, I know money is important in our world,
but so is our future.
And when, you know, the government is coming out
and saying, well, you know, we're gonna have to change
how we, um, deal with climate change.
And like, the banks cannot even make a decision to, um,
to base who they, um, who are their customers
because of this legislation.
Just seems outrageous to me. Please don't pass it.
Okay. Okay.
Uh, we're gonna go to Dan Bir, national MP for Northco.
I'm sorry. And thank you, Jody. I
Can't hear you. Thank
you. Can you hear me, Jody?
Yes, I can. Sorry. Great.
Hey, thank you for taking the time
to bring forward your submission to now versus four
and, uh, for coming here today and,
and for your written submission.
Just wanted to clarify, 'cause you have mentioned it
also in your written submission.
This is not a government bill,
this is a private member's bill.
Um, government parties have supported it to this stage.
Uh, and we'll make our minds up on the next stage
beyond this, but I just wanted,
Why, why, why would a, why would a member
of Parliament who's supposed to be representing us,
the people even think of dreaming up this kind
of legislation?
This is like something out of a Batman movie, something that
the Joker, you know, would dream up.
Yeah, that's all. Yeah.
I'll, I'll, I'll let Andy, um, foster respond to that.
Um, uh, Dan, did you have anything else, Dan?
No, I, I would really like to know what, why Andy Foster
has put forward this legislation.
Andy, you just quickly wanna respond, um, as to
what might be driving your motivation and,
and what comment supportive comments you might have had.
Oh, you're just on mute.
I was just, just trying to find my, uh, trying
to find the, the, the button there.
Um, look, um, thanks Jody for the, the submission.
We, we have had quite a lot of, um,
feedback from quite a number of sectors of, uh, society.
Some of them may well surprise you, um, saying
that they are concerned that,
that banks are making decisions or,
and in fact, other financial institutions are making
decisions which are not, uh,
in their view based on financial reasons,
but are based on other reasons, uh,
and that they're penalized for that, for the, the nature
of the, the business that they're in.
Banks, of course, have said, well, you know, if they think
that something is a sunset industry, they should be able
to take that into account.
Um, so it, it's exploring those sort of areas where,
and it's, it's things like, uh, petrol stations, uh,
it's things like the, the farming sector, the sex industry,
mining, those sort of, um, ones are some of the types
of businesses which have,
or people who have, uh,
expressed concerns about the way things are
being managed at the moment.
So just thought I'd let you know that.
Okay. Thank you, Mr. Foster. Okay.
Uh, thank you, um, Jody, for, um, uh, presenting.
Uh, Dan, have you still got your hand up
or is that, I think you Thanks.
I think you're done. Yep. Okay. No problem. Okay.
So thank you, um, Jody for coming and, uh, presenting to us
and seeing us ahead of time as well,
and all the best with that, um, uh, cough.
Thank you. You've made yourself loud and clear.
Um, Mr. Clark,
have we got anyone queued up on this? We'll take a short break.
Uh, we have Quentin here.
Oh, you've got Quentin? Yeah. Okay, let's do Quint.
We'll just keep smashing it
through members if you are happy with that. And Mr.
Chair, Palm G will take over for me now.
Oh, good. Okay. Thanks Todd. Thank you, JE thanks Palmek.
Uh, we just had a switch there, a sub in
and a sub off from the Act party, so there you go.
Um, Quentin, we've got you, uh, for five minutes.
Uh, Quentin Abraham, we look forward to your presentation.
Uh, turn out the, the committee, um, you,
you will have read my submission, um, which was short
and brief, and I, I do not support this
private member's Bill.
Uh, I'm a psychologist by training.
Um, you'll probably remember
that there was a very famous experiment, uh,
the marshmallow experiment by Michelle,
which talks about delayed gratification,
IE not having the rewards too quickly.
And that overall, that's a good idea, uh, both in terms
of the sort of intelligence,
but also, uh, sort of thinking about long term outcomes.
So what I'm gonna really speak to the issues
regarding climate change
and, um, I,
I mentioned the Climate Change Commission report.
Um, I, I understand that this country needs
to build its wealth, however you define that.
And, um, one way to do that is to mine
or to, uh, have industries that are going to destroy, uh,
the wellbeing of our country.
Um, so overall, I don't really see how
the reduction of compliance costs, which this bill aims to,
um, address is actually going to be good
for our, our country.
Uh, you know, I guess in in economic terms, we, we refer
to the externalities
and how those externalities are going to be passed on,
and who are those and
where are those externalities going to be passed to?
And from what I read, if I've understood, uh, some of the,
some of the, the parts of this, this bill, um,
it's, well, it's not, first of all,
it's not really very clear
and I, my my reading of it is,
it's not really very clear about
how you're actually going to complete that.
Um, and then, um, there's the issue of
not only who paid, but who is going to benefit.
Um, you don't have to look too far to find out where, um,
and why this is such a, a, a, a retrograde step.
If you travel to India, um, you will know that
through, um, hasty
industrialization without thinking about how to, uh,
you know, regulate their systems,
they have poisoned their groundwater.
I come back to the, and I, it is a pure miracle
that we can open a tap
and pure running clean water comes out of it.
Um, now that needs, if we want to protect that, we need
to sort of have a long term, uh, plan for that.
And part of that is going to be high quality regulation
of the right kind, not allowing overseas investors
to come invest in this country who will have no say
or no real interest in the wellbeing or the long term.
Thinking about this country, if you go to the south coast
of England, uh, you will not be able to, you know,
take part in a triathlon without getting poisoned
because they tip their sewage in any other
rubbish into the water.
I don't think we want that in our country.
Um, my partner is, is a doctor.
She works in various hospitals around the world.
One of the ones that she was she worked in is in the, uh,
northwest of Australia.
Um, so I'd never heard of Port Headland before that time.
And, uh, port Headland is the place where lots
of very rich minerals are passed through, um, that place.
Now, you would imagine with that amount of money going
through that port, that the hospital would be one
of the best resourced, one of the most high tech
amazing hospitals,
and you would imagine the PE people would be brimming
with health, but no, why is that?
Because the wealth doesn't trickle
that back down into that community.
Just that this bill which seeks to, uh, support the wealthy
and not the local people in a sort
of short term retrograde step, um, as a psychologist,
I'm interested in ho order.
So I'm interested in the wellbeing, everyone.
Uh, we're very lucky to have ideas about ho order in this
country that go beyond just, um, a quick fix, um,
within our tua believe
that there is a close connection between the earth, uh,
and the environment and our own wellbeing.
So this is not something, uh, we want
to be throwing away with a bill like this.
So overall, uh, I would really ask anyone
with any sense
or thought for the future of this country
to reject this bill. Thank you. Okay.
Thank you very much. Uh, Mr.
Abraham, we're at, um, time, uh,
I think you've made yourself and your points loud and clear.
I can't see any members wanting to seek any further clarity
or, or pop a question.
So thank you for coming in
and presenting to the finance and Expenditure committee.
You're welcome. Thank you so much. Okay.
Members, that takes us to, uh, rock the vote nz.
We've got Daymond here queued up for a 10 minute,
uh, submission.
Hi there. Can everyone hear me and see me all right?
Yes, we're in your hands.
Damon, you know how this process works.
If you can leave a little bit for, um, q
and A at the end, that would be great.
Yeah, yeah. Can I just clarify that this is for the, uh,
financial markets, conduct of institutions, bill?
Yes. Yes. Thank
You. Just making sure.
Okay. Um, so my name is Dam Gold Harbin.
I'm the deputy leader of rock, the voting Dead party.
I've been chosen to speak on behalf of the party
as I have a background in economics and finance
and have, um, and I have some experience in the,
um, FinTech industry.
We are here to speak in full support of this bill.
So Rock the Vote NZ considers the right to a bank account
as a human right, and this is
because of just how important banking is in today's world.
You need a bank account to, uh, receive a paycheck.
You need a bank account to receive a benefit from wins.
Even some places no longer take cash
and require the use of a bank account, um,
to basically buy things.
It's just simply a necessity for living in today's world.
People, um, people should only be Deb banked if it's
proven they've broken the law.
So obviously if someone has done something they shouldn't
have done, they should be Deb banked
because, you know, you must be lawful, surely.
And, but there are certain things banks could do.
They could create like a new tier of banking for people
that have been identified as high risk.
Um, just so that these people can get paid
and just so they can buy certain, uh,
like necessities with the bank account.
Rock the vote further acknowledges, um, the differences
between transactional banking and credit banking.
I know, um, uh, we did read some of the other submissions
that some of the banks did
and, um, they were concerned that with this bill,
it would mean that they had to provide credit services.
Um, our submission, we are kind
of just focused on transactional banking.
Um, we consider this to be different,
um, from credit banking.
Um, and really with transactional banking,
people should not be declined a bank account based on, well,
um, just any of the, um, human rights acts, um, clauses,
you know, um, everyone should have a right
to a bank account regardless of, um, political association,
regardless of their views on things.
Um, we just simply do not believe that
bank accounts should not be a battleground
for, um, ideology.
Some banks further claim
that de banking just doesn't happen in New Zealand.
Um, this, this actually isn't true.
There is one particular industry, um, cryptocurrency.
So what happens is that people who operate
with cryptocurrency, many people get
their transactions blocked.
Many people, um, with, um, companies
that want to do some blockchain, um, innovation,
they're very, very careful about how they present themselves
because they don't want
to be seen associated with cryptocurrency.
Um, and we note that in this bill, there's a clause
that's specific for, um, industry, which is
that they can't treat a consumer less favorably based on
the industry within they operate.
And we hope to see this applied to people that operate
with cryptocurrency and blockchain.
We've seen many complaints online.
Um, there's, there's the cryptocurrency Facebook group,
which has, um, a lot of members in it.
They complain that they can't get a bank
account for their company.
Um, even Easy Crypto, that's one
of the big ones in New Zealand.
They say that they can only get one with Kiwibank,
that all the other banks decline them because of high risk.
The thing about many of the centralized exchanges is
that they actually have very, very strong KYC.
They have very, um, I was helping a friend out with, um,
Binance the other day, and we were doing like withdrawals.
You know, they've gotta verify their, um, identity.
They've got some cases, facial recognition, you know,
so they do have very strong KYC, um, and Easy Crypto.
You know, they've got a board full of experienced people
with prior and, and current, um, governance experience,
and they struggle.
So if those guys struggle, you know, imagine
how the smaller businesses struggle, you know?
And, uh, I mean, I don't wanna be like that,
but it has created a chilling effect.
Um, maybe the banks did this on purpose,
but, you know, I don't wanna kind of say that.
And really what's the, what's this caused is that
our blockchain, innovation
and cryptocurrency, um, innovation has kind of fallen
behind, um, in New Zealand compared to other countries.
Um, we're also pleased to see that a bank, um,
can only withdraw services by a valid
and verifiable commercial reason.
Too often a financial institution will refuse, um,
to provide, um, to provide services
and cite high risk as the concern.
And usually in a lot of cases,
high risk is kind of a catchall reason.
Um, and a lot of the time it won't be
dis disclosed to the user.
Um, there's banks that do this.
There's, um, other financial institutions
that aren't banks that do this.
PayPal is a massive, um, um, example of this.
PayPal does this all the time.
Um, and we'd like to see that.
Um, well, yeah, we'd like to see this actually be working,
and we'd like to see that banks and,
and these places don't, don't simply find a workaround
for this and wanna make sure that they, um,
that it's enforced properly.
Um, and really our key takeaway is quite simple, that
the battlefield of ideology
and politics should not obstruct our daily lives.
You know, if banks become politically involved like they
have been with, um, some of the, um, coal mining
and coal places, then unfortunately they should be prepared
for political consequence.
And private companies should really just focus on making
money with a hint of proper social responsibility.
Thank you.
Okay. Thank you.
Uh, Damon, we've got, uh, time for questions.
Uh, if anyone wanted to pose one,
I'm looking at the sponsor.
Did you wanna respond? Um, Andy, 'cause we have got time.
Yeah. Thank you. I will. Um, if I can, um, look, um,
thank you very much for the, um, the submission.
Uh, I'd be the only one that you've raised in terms of ba
of, uh, industries that you're aware of, uh,
is the cryptocurrency industry.
Are there any others that you've, uh, you've come across?
Oh, sorry. Um, my, just cut out a little bit.
Um, could you repeat the question? Sorry about that.
Oh, I just wanted, I mean, you mentioned specifically, we,
we've had a number of industries pointed out to us,
but I just wondered if there were any other industries
that you'd had pointed out to you other than the crypto, uh,
currency industry that you've mentioned.
Um, so there's cryptocurrency for sure.
There's, um, some political candidates have been targeted,
um, in
New Zealand.
Yeah, there's been political people in New Zealand
that have been Deb banked, um, I can't remember his name.
There's people overseas that have been Deb banked.
Um, there's the thing with, um, Roger Farage
who was Deb banked in the uk.
Yeah, I'm aware of that. There was a
precedent overseas for that. Yeah.
Yeah. Okay. And Obviously this
bill would, um, prevent it.
It's more like, um, preventative here, which is great.
Thank you. And the other question is that, um, you said
that the right to a bank account as separate to, to a loan,
um, arrange or credit arrangements is a human right.
Are there any circumstances where you could see that that
is, is not appropriate?
I mean, we, we've had the, the case of, uh, Gloria Vale,
which actually went to the, um, court of Appeal, uh, which
was effectively had its banking services
withdrawn by one bank.
Um, and then I suspect none
of the others wanted to touch it either.
But, um, yeah. So is everybody, in your view, entitled
to have a, the ability to be able
to have a financial transaction?
Um, service? Yes.
Yes. Um,
because transactional banking that
this is different from credit banking, credit is like loans.
And the thing is, the banks have to kind of, that is
where the banks run all their big models
and saying, okay, well,
we can loan them this amount of money Yeah.
And expect to be paid back and so, so forth.
Whereas transactional banking, really
all it is, is just getting paid from work or business
and then being able to spend that money on food
and just supplies and necessities.
Um, I really don't see a situation
where someone wouldn't be entitled to that.
Uh, um, unless you want to go down the route
where if if someone has committed a crime, someone
has committed fraud, then, um, uh,
you would either have a separate banking to adjust for that,
which is heavily monitored,
or you could use something similar to
what WINS does with their payment cards.
Yeah, no, I, I, I understand the kind of thing.
Well, if I can, um, Mr.
Chair, just one other, um, uh, question,
which is just in terms of transparency, if, uh,
if somebody is, uh, an organization, business, whatever, is,
um, either de banked, uh, you know, existing service, uh,
withdrawn in, in this, now I'm talking the loan credit area,
uh, or, um, uh,
or denied, do you think it's reasonable
that banks should at least be out, have to, uh,
tell them why they've been denied in terms of,
because we've, we've had a lot of this discussion about
Sunset Industries in inverted commerce, um,
that they should, at least banks
should at least be able to put on the table.
We believe this is a sunset industry,
therefore we don't believe that we'll be able
to get our money back, uh, in time. Yes.
Must be transparent. Okay.
Thank you. I, I suppose my thing in the submission was
that with, um, some places like PayPal
and banking, a lot of the time they don't actually tell you
the reason why you're deep banned or they can taken off.
They'll just say, you're too high risk. Sorry. Yeah.
And yeah, that's a big complaint people have.
Thank you. Yeah.
Okay. Thank you. We we're at time.
David, did you, you, you've taken your hand down.
That's all right. Uh, we're at time. Thank you so much.
Thank you, uh, Damon for, um, uh, taking us through that
and through for your, um, submission from Rock the Vote.
So I appreciate it.
Awesome. Thank you so much. You guys have a good one.
Okay. Thank you. Now, um, Helma, uh, ver Mullin
is, um, online.
I understand, uh,
and is also a strong supporter of the, um,
member's, bill,
well, at least her written submission is we will see
what the oral submission, uh, si.
Hilma, thank you for joining us.
We've, we can see you there online if you wanna flick
your camera on or not.
Uh, that will be great, regardless.
We probably need your microphone on. That'll be good too.
Welcome,
Uh, with my submission with a question, was I, how
do you still, there are
four major banks in
New Zealand loans and
Helma. We're just having difficulty
with this line.
Maybe if you can, can you flick your camera off and see if
Yeah, I can Just,
Yeah.
Okay. Can you hear me okay?
Can you hear me now?
Yes. Yes, I can
Hear you. Okay. Now let's just let,
let's just,
let's just go without the camera.
Um, and, uh, uh, yeah,
we'll start, we'll start the clock now.
So thank you. You got five minutes? Yeah.
I end the mission with a question,
independence or democracy.
There are the most loans
and credit banks are run by,
bought several farms.
And indirectly our export and businesses.
And my
38 board members
can sum up
A
Credit.
Were foreign owned bank
or financial
Stability, Salads, and for a variable,
We, we are having trouble.
Um, Helma hearing you.
Um, I, I wonder if it's worth, um, uh, Andy,
you've seen, um, Helman's, um, present, uh,
you've seen her written submission.
Uh, perhaps Andy, there's some comments that you can make
because, um, it might, that might be better traffic than
what we can pick up from Helma.
Oh, I was gonna suggest that maybe Helma would, um,
log off and log back on
and see if it, uh, that improves things at all.
'cause it's very, very hard to make out what you're
Saying. Yeah. Okay.
Thank you. Yeah.
Uh, if you can do that Helma,
and, um, in the meantime, what we might do is go straight to
for and Bird Yeah.
And the Clark will see if you are, if
that improves your connection.
'cause we, we want, we wanna give you every chance,
but it's, it's frustrating for everyone if,
if we can't hear you clearly, so we'll.
We'll, if you can, um, log off
and log back on in the meantime, uh, to the clerks, um,
if we can get, um, Scott, uh, Burnett, um, from Forres
and Bird Online for his 10 minutes.
I understand he is there. And Richard Capy,
Your Honor. Cameron, can
you hear me at all?
Yes, we can. Hi, Koto. Koto Koto Kato.
Uh, it's nice to see everybody,
and thank you very much for your time this afternoon.
Uh, my name's Richard Capy.
I'm the group manager for conservation advocacy
for Forest and Bird.
Uh, I'm joined today by, uh, my colleague Scott Burnett,
who is, uh, one of our regional conservation managers.
And, uh, thank you for your time today.
Um, as you may be aware, just some quick opening remarks.
Forres and Birders, new Zealand's largest independent
conservation organization.
Uh, and for over a hundred years now, uh, we've been a voice
for A TRO as unique natural heritage, uh,
giving voice to nature.
Um, uh, as you've probably seen in our written submission,
we are here to state our opposition to this bill.
Uh, and very much our focus is actually the environmental
risks that the bill creates.
Um, so we're concerned
that the bill could threaten New Zealand's by adversity
and ly undermine our climate commitments.
And there are three key points that we'd wish to make, uh,
to the committee today.
Uh, first, that climate
and environmental risk is actually commercial risk.
Uh, so trying to disaggregate
or separate the two doesn't quote work.
Secondly, that the bill will fundamentally undermining New
Zealand's existing climate
and environmental policy framework.
And I note the Prime Minister's remarks the other day when
he reinforced his commitment to the Paris Agreement.
Um, so I think that's quite important context if we are
looking at, uh, this piece of, uh, legislation.
And third, that it poses a direct
and unacceptable threat to our indigenous biodiversity.
Um, and I'll hand over to Scott just
to tease those points out a little bit further. Thank you.
Got Koto. So, to elaborate on those points Richard made,
the first point we make is that the central flaw
of this bill is the artificial line that tries to draw
between a valid and verifiable commercial reason.
And what its explanatory note calls murky, environmental,
social, or governance moralizing, in our view,
that's a false distinction.
Today, climate change
and environmental degradation are primary drivers
of commercial risk.
As mps noted during the first reading,
banks aren't divesting from high emitting sectors out
of woke ideology.
They're doing so because of the undeniable financial risks.
These risks are very real
and can be broken into two categories.
The first is physical risks from floods, droughts,
and storms that directly threaten the value in insur
and insurability of assets from farms to coastal properties.
The second category is transition risks
from the global shift to a lower emissions economy.
This is making carbon intensive sunset industries
commercially unviable a bank's refusal to finance
what could be termed Sunset Industries
is a commercial decision, not a moral one.
To force financial institutions
to ignore these commercial realities is reckless.
This bill demands that banks pretend
the world is not changing.
The second point we wish to make is
that the bill doesn't exist in a vacuum.
We are concerned that this bill would actively weaken New
Zealand's established climate policy.
Clause four of the bill would prevent banks from considering
climate related reporting standards issued
by the external reporting board.
Parliament established the disclosure regime
so lenders could accurately see in price, climate risk.
This bill would render those disclosures meaningless
for the very institutions they were designed to inform.
This is out of step
with New Zealand's climate obligations under the Paris
Agreement and our domestic targets under the Climate
Change Response Act.
The third alarming aspect of this bill is the direct threat
that poses to our natural environment by compelling banks
to fund businesses, regardless
of their environmental impact, the bill
would inevitably channel money toward activities
that cause habitat destruction,
pollute our freshwater ecosystems and increase emissions.
The parliamentary debate confirmed the Bill's intent is
to protect industries like mining
and intensive agriculture from financial security
over their environmental impacts, sorry,
from financial scrutiny over their environmental impacts.
Financial institutions are key partners in the transition
to an economy that doesn't degrade natural capital.
This bill would prevent them from playing that vital role,
instead risking greater
and ongoing environmental
degradation. Back to you, Richard.
So, um, look, just in summary, look, we, we,
we have obviously, as you can tell,
some deep concerns about the bill.
Um, we, we think it's on a misunderstanding of risk,
actively contradicts and undermines those broader climate
policy, uh, frameworks that are in place.
And, and, and also I think as Forest
and voters has made clear,
we we're worried about the impact it could have on our
natural heritage, uh, which is just so important
to our economy in so many different ways.
Um, I think it's also important that the, the term valid
and verifiable commercial reason is left, um,
pretty ambiguous in the general policy statement.
And that actually creates uncertainty.
I think one of the things that, uh,
all participants in financial markets look
for is, is certainty.
They want to be able to, uh, uh, participate effectively
and be able to access capital.
And that uncertainty is, is quite unworkable, uh, and,
and could create a very challenging regulatory environment.
And in that respect, it could actually stifle rather than
support, uh, the kind of investment that actually, uh,
we know that our banks are gonna be looking to make,
which is the kind of inverse of this,
which is the opportunities that exist for those industries,
which are actually looking to be progressive around, uh,
a more sustainable future.
Um, so I think we, you know, we're pretty clear,
like financial institutions must be free to assess all forms
of risk, including the actual risks, uh,
post climate change, environmental harm,
and that's actually the, the definition
of responsible lending and sound commercial practice.
Um, so I think moving away from
that is, it would be quite worrying.
So we would urge the committee
to recognize this significant risk in this bill.
Uh, and we actually recommend that the committee, uh,
finds the bill isn't fit for purpose
and shouldn't be progressed.
Thank you. Happy to take any questions and,
and I can see. Okay.
Oh, thank you Richard. And, um, thank you, Scott.
We've got a question here from the sponsor. Andy Foster.
Yeah, thank you Richard and Scott.
And, um, uh, nice to see you again, Richard.
Um, look, question I've got is, um, you talked about a,
a range of different activities.
Can't remember exactly what, um, what you said there, Scott.
Um, it was, it was mining, um, pollution, that sort of, uh,
a number of issues around that.
Um, and banks being forced, I think was the word you used
to, um, uh, to fund those things.
But clearly, I mean, they're
not gonna fund something that's illegal.
Uh, so that presumably those activities must have been,
if if those exist, those hypothetical exist, um, uh, uh,
activities existed, they would be,
they would've been legalized.
So my question is, you've said that in 10, uh,
that this would force banks to finance activities misaligned
with New Zealand's obligation under Paris.
Um, but the, the out there about commercial activities
and everybody's, we, we've had a lot of submitters say, um,
that banks should be free
to make their own commercial decisions.
Um, shouldn't they be able
to explain those commercial decisions in a way which is
transparent, uh, to, uh, particularly to any organization
that they had decided that they did not want
to provide services to?
Yeah, and I think that they should be free to,
uh, state their position.
And I think the restriction on them being able
to not lend to certain industries, um,
means they're unable to fulfill that function.
They're, they're forced to then lend, um,
despite the risk that their, uh, investors may face.
That's my point. My point is that if the,
if there is a risk their investors would face,
then they should be able to explain that risk, uh,
to any wouldbe client, uh, to say, look,
we're not gonna fund you because,
and here are the numbers, here are the reasons for that.
Now, the client might disagree with it,
but at least they've got a transparency set of reasons,
rather than just saying, we know we don't like
you 'cause the industry you're in.
So I think, Andy, you sort of, kind of teased that out
with some of the lenders, how their risk committees actually
make those decisions and how they communicate
to applicants. I think
It's communication, But yeah, I think the point
that we're making is that, you know, uh,
banks are making decisions all the time on a range
of activities, uh, which are legal.
Um, but where they have risk portfolios where they,
they deem that actually they've got a degree of exposure
that they're not comfortable with.
I think anything that starts to undermine that,
in particular, if it's based on a premise that, um,
for example, there's a disagreement about, uh, the,
the motivation behind that,
I think we'd be deeply concerned about that.
Uh, and in particular around, uh, around some of the things
that have been mentioned, uh, to do
with things like climate based disclosures
and environmental concerns, uh, just
because an activity is, is legal, doesn't mean
that a a lender should necessarily have to undertake
that risk with their capital.
No, just explaining the risk, I think was the, the point.
Okay. Thank you.
Right. We're just about at time.
Anything else, uh, members? Okay. Thank you, Richard.
Thank you, um, Scott from Forres
and Bird for, um, for your, uh, presentation
and for joining us for the oral hearing today.
Fantastic. Thank you very much for your time.
Thank you. Thank you very Much. Thank you.
Okay. We have, according to my, um, list here,
we should have three submitters left.
Who, who's up next Clark's office.
Have we got Kit with, uh, with us?
Yes, we do. We'll ring Them in now. Yeah. Thank you.
Welcome Greg O'Connor too, to the proceedings.
Your Mr. Chair. Very good.
Okay, Mr. We've got KA weather's, uh, we can almost see you.
Okay, Mr. Withers, can you hear me
okay?
We can see you. Uh, we'll just get you to take,
take the mute off your microphone, which you have.
You've got, um, five minutes.
We've got your submission here.
Um, and, uh, we look forward to, uh, any additional comments
that you wanna make or, uh,
and leave, leave us some time for some interaction
as well. Thank you.
Oh, thanks for taking the time
to hear what I've got to say.
You can see that most
of my concern concerns the climate crisis that we're in.
You know, we're already seeing the melting of the ice caps.
That's gonna mean that in a few hundred years,
Wellington will have had to retreat.
I don't think we are doing enough.
Um, on managed retreat, I quote material
from, um, um, a study
by professor Jonathan Bus Boston on managed retreat.
Um, and I,
my first comment was, um, it'll require
that we, uh, that the banks fund coal companies
that are heating up the planet
and driving species to extinction.
Um, and I include there in the comments, uh,
what our, the UN Secretary General said,
we're in the fight of our lives.
We are losing our planets approaching tipping points
that will make climate chaos irreversible.
We're on a highway to hell with our foot on the accelerator.
So for me, um, you know,
the banks gonna play an important part in financing,
mitigation and, uh, managed retreat,
and they need to be helped in that respect.
But, um, not as far as the, um, you can see
what my objections are under the comments.
I'll just say briefly. Um, earlier this year,
I paid off my daughter's, uh, mortgage in Sydney.
And, um, the a NC wanted a particular rate
for the value of the Australian dollar.
I showed them on my phone that this was way over the, um,
the daily rate.
They said, take it or leave it.
So I had to pay an extra $4,000
and I complained to the banking ombudsman
and then the Minister of Finance to be told
that banks can charge what they like.
This is clearly wrong.
Their rate should be tied to the market rate.
So there's, um, I'll stop there
and let you guys have a have a go at me.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no.
We, we can't assume anyone's gonna have a go at you
with this is a very well behaved subcommittee.
Uh, I'm going to go on to the best world,
best behaved person of the me, uh, committee.
And that's Dr. David Wilson, New Zealand first.
Okay, Thank you for that, Cameron.
Um, can, uh, just a, uh, a side, I heard your message, um,
clear and concise, uh, around what you wanted
to say in regards to your daughter's experience
and your experience in the transaction with the bank.
There is a member's bill, um, on the books at the moment
around financial transactions and banks.
Um, so you may wish to bring that up again at
that particular member's bill.
That's great. Thank you.
Tha thank you. Um, Dr. Wilson, uh, we wind up
with the sponsor of the bill, uh, his worship, Andy Foster,
Nice to see you.
Um, but remember we described
what crazy person would sponsor a bill like this.
Um, look just on, on your experience with the banks, I mean,
the take it or leave it attitude, it's a very, very, um,
you know, the banks are very big organizations
with an enormous amount of power,
and people dealing with those banks are often,
and even businesses are often quite powerless.
And that I think is why, uh, this bills come to come to pass
because there, we've heard, um, the experiences
of some businesses
and individuals, uh, who have received that treatment.
Um, in acknowledging that,
is there a better way in your view, in which we can,
even the playing field a little bit between banks
and their clients, or would be clients?
That's a general question.
In my particular case, I think
that they shouldn't be allowed to charge more than, say,
1% over the mid-market rate
when they're doing overseas currency transactions.
But there's nothing, there's
nothing like that at the moment.
Guess so That doesn't have general question at all. Sorry.
Yeah, I I guess the point is a lot of people have, uh,
have said, well, banks should be free
to make their own commercial decisions.
And your instance, they have made a commercial decision,
which is, uh, is Goliath versus David.
And David doesn't have a slingshot
of God in his side in this, in this case,
I didn't know at the time that there
were alternative channels.
Since then, I've heard about Wises
and I've sent money to my daughter using Wisers,
which gives a much better rate than a NZ.
Good to hear. Oh, very good.
Oh, so she's a very lucky daughter by the sound of it.
Well done. Well done. Um, that is good.
We just, you gotta then convince her on the condition she
moves back to New Zealand.
Oh, That's, that's,
that's the only reason you've paid off a mortgage, I'm sure.
Okay. Now, thank you so much, uh, Mr. Withers. No pleasure.
Very good for you coming in for that five minute spot,
we've now got three 50, um, outa
and members, you would've assume
that they've put an extensive, um, submission together.
And so they've got 10 minutes, uh, as our second
to last, uh, submitter for the day by the look of it.
Thanks and thanks Cameron.
Um, if you could also let in Alice who's also joining the
Zoom call and is submitting alongside us, would be great.
I'll just start while you in. Thank you. All good.
Um, yeah, Koto, Adam Tucker Enga.
Um, in a moment, Alice is gonna join us
and begin the construction of a high risk house of cards,
which is fitting because it is exactly
what this bill would force banks to build
with devastating consequences,
both our economy and our climate.
Um, we represent three 50 Altara, an organization
with a track record of campaigning for banks
to divest from fossil fuels.
Um, as you said, you've written our written submission,
the success story of divestment
and protecting the economy from stranded assets while
helping to address the climate crisis.
And in fact, divestment actually needs
to be going much further.
Uh, clearly banks are doing this for economic reasons.
As Westpac references, Mr. Foster referenced, um, you know,
Westpac cease lending to the coal mining sector,
not only due to solid energy,
but also due to risk from the future demand profile of coal
and high credit risk involved.
It wasn't just about solid, solid energy
and it isn't just about solid energy.
Why on earth would parliament force banks
to make investments that are not only financially
irresponsible, but like the answer's pretty clear, right?
I think it's about throwing a lifeline
to mates in fossil fuel industry as can be seen,
both at the hand side and the opening statement,
which was peppered with references to coal
and mining, using domestic steel making
to justify the bill at a time when NNC steel was slashing
coal use by installing electric arc furnaces.
You know, and new coal, coal mining
for steel was all for export.
We cannot allow the profits of a dying fossil fuel industry
to take precedence over energy prices,
financial common sense, and the planet.
You can see that the house of cards is going up.
We also want to reframe this debate by, um,
outlining the commercial reality that thousands
of bank customers and key investors are already
boycotting banks for ethical reasons.
And no small part due to campaigns from three 50 and others.
Avoiding mass walkouts from your customers is itself a
legitimate commercial reason
for a bank to withdraw services.
You know, that's not work lobbying.
Um, we've got a couple of minutes,
so I'm gonna draw into the main thrust of the bill.
You know, that section 4 4 6, JA one B, um,
which is the Bill's intent to, you know,
not treat any customer less favorably in the
provision of financial services.
There are so many reasons
why customers need to be treated differently.
Let's take farming for an example.
After market research found there is 66% latent demand
for electrification on farms.
A SB launched a solar loan tailored to that farming market,
but under this bill completely unlawful.
You know, because it treats non-farm consumers less
favorably than others, or property insurance
is another example Mr.
Ffo outlined, you know, which is fundamentally based on
treating customers differently.
Now, if we multiply that chilling effect
for endless examples across the economy,
you can imagine the damage this could cause.
This is not something that a few amendments from national
are gonna be able to solve.
Now, in the introduction, the bills advocates argue.
So during its introduction,
the bills advocates have been arguing
that banks can still act if they have a commercially
justifiable reason for doing so.
But as everyone has outlined during this submission process,
there's no definition, no evaluation standard,
and no certainty with the risk of, you know, 500 grand fines
or imprisonment hanging over them.
Financial institutions are going to keep accounts open
for risky and unethical clients rather than face it,
rather than face expensive legal battles
about vague legislation.
Of course, as a, as a spill wants to do, right, it is going
to stop banks from investing in fossil
fuels, even when it's commercial.
Just fireable to do so, because there's just,
who's gonna want to go through a process?
Banks, if a coal company has their services withdrawn,
of course they're going to fight back against it.
Of course they're gonna take it to court
and this bill gives 'em ammo to do so.
So even when it doesn't make sense for the bank,
the bank's gonna go, this is too much.
We are not gonna invest. So
that's why the commercial justifiable reason does
not make sense here.
For example, it was, you know, a very prudent decision
for banks to end their credit
with video rental companies, right?
They withdrew their finance from industry,
from video rental companies, which would've been prevented
by bills such as this, you know,
and there's so many examples I could give like video rental.
So, yeah, I mean,
and I, I, we can to go to questions in a bit,
but this legislation would create a minefield
with the onus on insurance companies
and banks to justify their decision,
which we know will increase cost for consumers.
You know, and last week, um, Mr. Foster, you know, suggested
that we'll just let anyone with the means take
it to court and work it out.
And I know you walked back that a little bit,
but you know, we can't just be doing this
because Trump's America is doing it,
as was also referenced last week.
That's not how lawmaking should work.
You know, and I also note the continuous attempt
by the draft of this bill to be open to anything
that retains your policy intent.
You are open to anything, whatever,
whatever changes we can make that sounds good as long
as it retains the policy intent.
But there's no specifics here, right?
The responsibility lies with the bill drafter
to propose reasonable wording that makes sense.
And I would suggest that the lack of reasonable wording,
proposals and reasonable suggestions made is
because it can't be done right.
That, that to do what this bill intends to do,
it cannot be done with amendments for all the reasons
that submitters have outlined.
We don't need legislation.
In conclusion, we don't need legislation to force banks
to fund dead end coal mines, which prop up yesterday's loses
with today's profits and tomorrow's climate disasters.
This is not about lobbying for moral superiority.
We are advocating for fiscal sanity
and a future worth banking on.
And I'll leave, I'll pass on to Alice to finish us off.
Thank you. Aye,
I think that we all know, know that most
of the time this bill assessors forces banks
to stack card upon card onto the house of cards
that is risky fossil fuel investments,
which is already less productive or in decline.
And one of the cards in this house is gonna collapse
and New Zealanders will be paying for
it twice over through financial incident climate impacts.
Not only has the fossil fueled house of cards collapsed,
it was pretty difficult to build in the first place
and it's just not worth it.
10 the car towel, hair par pie.
We've kept it short so we can
have five minutes for questions.
Oh, bang. On, uh, you certainly have got, uh, four
or five minutes for questions
and I've got the sponsor here, Andy Foster, ready to roll.
Let's do that. Um, look,
thank you very much for the submission.
Um, just a couple of areas that I did wanna ask you, um,
about, um, you talked about the high risk proposition.
Isn't that the whole basis of thinking about this,
that if banks have got a justifiable commercial reason
for saying they don't wanna bank a particular business
or particular, and you've only focused on the mining one,
but there are a number of others as well.
Um, um, for example, the sex industry said this as well.
I dunno, that's a dying industry, in fact, as people regard
that as the second oldest profession.
Um, so I see the chair smiling a little bit.
Um, but if, if there is a justifiable commercial reason,
why is it not reasonable to expect the banks
who have an enormous amount of power to explain
that in a way which is transparent?
Because it would add massive costs for them to do so?
It would add a massive amount of, like, if, if it's, if,
if something might be, if something is,
if something is massively,
massively commercially unjustifiable, right?
Yeah, probably a bank will potentially go
through the rigmarole of the process of, you know,
offloading the customer and so on
because it's massively worth and it's worth the costs.
But when there's, most
of the time when something is in general,
it's not a good investment, right?
It may not be the worst investment in the world.
It might not be throwing rubbish completely down the,
down the down the sink.
But it's not a particularly good investment.
A bank is not going to go through all the rigmarole,
all the extra compliance,
all the extra, you know, record keeping.
They're gonna have to keep through the process,
go into a court battle, have a massive court fees,
maybe win, maybe lose, you know, define law
that hasn't even been drafted properly.
Why would a bank go through that process?
And so, even when it, my point is
that even when it is commercially justifiable, the rigmarole
of proving that is just so high, it would, it would cost
so much for banks and banks wouldn't do it.
And then when they would do it, it would add cost
to consumers, I guess is our point there.
But, but surely in reaching the decision
that they have made not to provide banking services,
they must have gone through at least some level
of assessment of that particular, of the credit risk of
that particular business.
Otherwise they wouldn't have made the decision.
So they must have already done at least something.
'cause otherwise they're just saying, well, we,
for some reason, we're not gonna give you any banking
services because they feel like it, they've got
to have done something surely.
Yeah. And absolutely they,
What's saying is all it's saying is explain that.
Yeah, absolutely. I, I hear that.
And, and I mean, number one, of course the initial point is
that, you know, just, just to record keeping
and stuff would add extra compliance.
But I think the real point here is that they're gonna,
not only is it about have they done the work already,
it's about what's gonna be used against them now, right?
And we don't know, there's no definition.
Again, um, there's no definition for
what commercially justification means, right?
And so they've, they, yes, they've done the,
they've done the work, yes,
they've added a little bit of record keeping, no worries.
You know, so they can prove that they've done the work,
but then there's gotta be this, they
don't even know what we're arguing about.
We don't know, there's no specific confines that they're,
you know, that they're monitoring it against.
Um, so it could go, you know, we already directors are all,
and it's already not needed, right?
I mean, if we want to ensure
that banks are acting commercially justifiable,
this is already happening, right?
Directors are already under a duty
to act in the best interest of the company, you know,
which still require a commercial rationale
for all business decisions, you know, the bill's not needed.
And I'd also just note that, you know, the fact
that some fossil fuel companies are being Deb banked,
does not represent a field tilted against
the fossil fuel industry, right?
In the same way that a declined mining permit
that doesn't make sense, doesn't necessarily
represent a resource system stick to against mining,
you know, a reasonable decision by reasonable actors
that they, they've done, they've done the work, absolutely,
they've done the research, but they shouldn't have
to fight in court over it,
be potentially sent to jail over it.
You know, why would, why would they risk it? You know,
I think I was trying to say they should at least be
transparent about the reasons,
but that's okay. I'll leave it there.
Yeah, I, I, we'd be very happy
with transparency about this, you know,
but that's not, that's very
different from b them for doing it.
Right? Th Thank you Mr. Foster.
I'm gonna go to Dr. David Wilson, uh, New Zealand first.
Sorry, you're on mute. David.
David, can you hear? Can we hear you?
Yep. We've got intro saying thank you.
Uh, so couple of things.
Do you, do you believe that ESG is actually an added layer
of, um, compliance that they've put on themselves already?
Don't answer that one just yet. Hold that fire.
And the second question, which is aligned to that in terms
of do you believe it's a bank's role to provide these moral
and ethical judgements rather than parliament,
especially in terms of climate change and whether
or not it is a illegal or illegal activity?
Thank you, uh, David? Um, first of all, sorry, Mr. Wilson.
Um, first of all, um, yeah, absolutely both, um, banks
and external actors have put, um, you know, ESG, um,
considerations on which we know actually often affect bottom
lines, bottom lines as well.
Um, and sorry, regarding that second question, um,
which was about, um, sorry, can you repeat
that last part of the question again?
Yeah, so essentially they're taking on a moral
and ethical as you, as you rightly pointed out, position,
and is that their role, especially in, in terms of whether
or not the activity is legal versus illegal,
which is currently where we stand, you know, if it's a,
a legal activity, then they have every right
to bank them rather than de bank them.
Um, so we've got this layer, if you like, of moral
and ethical decisions being made by banks.
Well, um, thank you. I mean, I'd, I'd, first of all,
I'd say obviously the majority of our submission was that,
you know, on the financial side of things, you know,
they're making it largely in the financial side of things.
Um, but I'd also, and I'd also question, um,
and I'd also say that absolutely it, you know, if, if,
if the, if a bank knows that, um,
causing climate change is going to cause, um, you know,
mass, um, climate
and economic shocks to our system through climate disasters
and so on, absolutely it makes sense for banks to be,
you know, whether you call that ethics
or not, of course it makes sense not
to be investing in something that we know is going
to threaten and destabilize the country and the economy.
Of course, it makes sense to not invest in ethically in a
company that is committing human rights abuses
that may end up, you know, in court
and generally is gonna impact, you know, finance later on.
Of course, it makes sense for banks to divest
for ethical reasons when their customers are pressured to do
so, and they'll lose businesses for not doing it right.
Ethics is fundamentally intertwined.
If a company is, if a company, um, is pressured by thousands
of their, their customers to, to divest from a certain thing
for an ethical reason, all the customers will walk away.
That is about the bank's bottom line.
And there's nothing wrong with that, right?
So that is a great example, I think,
of why they should act ethically and in, in the other sense.
I just note about if you saying it's Parliament's role
to decide these ethical questions.
Well, you know, there's been no, um, uh,
in, in response to I think Mr.
Um, Ricardo Ricardo's, um, question last week.
Um, you know, there's been no research done about
by parliament or by this committee,
or by the bill drafter, um, about
what commercial risk will, will, will have from this.
And there's been no research at all regarding this.
So why is Parliament being suited
to make these arbitrary decisions?
But, you know, banks are not
suited to make the arbitrary decisions.
But my main point is that I think they are able to do so
for commercial regions especially.
Okay. We, we will leave it at, at that.
That's, we've had a good go there at, um,
for three 50 RT Row.
So thank you, um, both for coming in and, uh,
and presenting, uh, your submission to the Finance
and Expenditure subcommittee this afternoon.
Thanks Cameron. And we'd be keen
to engage with people further on. Thank
You. Yeah, thank you.
Thank you for taking the time. Okay.
Members that take us, takes us, um,
and Clarks office, please, uh, correct me if I'm wrong,
but it takes us to our last submitter we are running, um,
well ahead of schedule, thanks to some excellent Sharon.
Um, Cameron, just, just
One quick one. Did we, uh,
did we get Helma
Back? Uh,
is is Helma, we gave her the option
because it didn't look like the wifi was gonna stand up
to it or the connection, um, of telephoning, um,
Clarkson. Yeah, she,
she couldn't telephone
and, um, she's still on the line if you wanted
to try her again after, uh, Rick Baisley.
Okay. Let's see if we can try her again
after Rick Baisley, but, um, yeah, good point.
Thank you. Um, Andy. Okay, so Mr. Baisley, are you there?
We're bringing you in.
Okay, Mr. Baisley,
can you hear me?
Rick Baisley,
we're coming through.
Are we?
Well, we'll bring him back in
and see if he can, uh, turn his microphone on now.
Okay, thank you.
Hello. Okay, Mr. Baisley, can you hear us?
I can, yes. Hi.
Okay, thank you. Thank you for your submission.
Uh, just to help frame, you frame it up,
your opening line is the bill undermines
freedom of contract.
We're just trying to give the sponsor a
bit of thinking time on this.
Um, so we look forward to your submission.
You've got five minutes, thank you for, um, uh,
presenting in advance.
Okay. Thank you very much. Um, okay.
I'd like to outline six reasons why I think the proposed
bill should be rejected in its entirety.
So yeah, number one undermines freedom of contract.
Surely it should be up to the banks to decide for themselves
and not have lending decisions forced on them
in a free society.
Isn't that a gross overreach of the state?
It certainly is the very opposite of a free market,
which makes highly hypocritical of the right wing proposes.
The second point is that it's unworkable.
It would be a legal nightmare
to prove an arbitrary threshold of risk for the banks.
How would the government of the day be able to prove,
presumably in a court of law that the bank's decision
to not lend to a fossil fuel project
was based on moral grounds
of avoiding future climatic catastrophe
rather than purely fidi fiduciary interest?
And that I suggest would involve an unjustifiable level
of scrutiny and interference
and furthest that much investment lending
to fossil fuel companies today is already high risk
as the probability of stranded assets
increases year on year.
The third point is
that I think the bill is immoral in principle,
since when in a free society does the government have the
right to force companies
to act against their own moral guidelines in a free society,
private companies
and citizens get
to make up their own minds every day about investment
and consumption decisions
and whether they care about the moral consequences
of those decisions on people or the environment.
Some businesses and people care deeply about these things
whilst others care, not one jot.
And that is the nature of a free society.
The exception to this is when governments act
to bring about positive changes to society, the economy,
and the environment when market forces
alone are failing to do so.
I suggest that New Zealand Bills first is the exact
opposite of this principle.
Fourthly, I would, uh, the bill
ironically appears to be illegal.
And I'll outline that the government is already being in
challenged in court by lawyers
for Climate Action New Zealand in a judicial review
for canceling policies that were reducing our emissions
and bringing in new policies
that will increase our emissions.
These policies will stop New Zealand from meeting its
domestic and international legal obligations, such
as the Zero Carbon Act, the Paris Agreement,
and some free trade agreements, most notably with the eu,
which has clauses through the carbon,
carbon border adjustment mechanisms,
which will punish New Zealand exporters.
Bley, the bill is very anti-science.
The science of climate change is unequivocal according
to the International Energy Agency.
No new gas, oil,
or coal fields should be approved for development.
And in order to keep global temperature rise
below 1.5 degrees Celsius,
approximately approximately 60%
of existing fossil fuels reserves must remain in the ground.
So that's the science. And the last point, the six point is
I think that New Zealand first is guilty of scaremongering
and putting disinformation into this debate.
So I'll just outline that the fear
that New Zealand first is trying to introduce to this debate
is that the entire fossil fuel industry will be Deb banked
overnight, and
consequently, our economy will come to a grinding halt.
This is simply not the case.
The managed response of the banking sector
to the fossil fuel industry is
to incrementally reduce its lending over the
next two to three decades.
The fossil fuel industry is on notice worldwide
as the global economy rapidly transitions to planet saving
clean, renewable, and cheaper forms of energy.
New Zealand first is presenting the case
that we don't have enough viable alternatives
to foster fuels to keep the lights on.
I would refute that as blatant disinformation,
the Green Party zero Carbon Act
and the policies put in place by the previous government
had the country on the right track
to meet our emission reduction targets
and keep the economy going.
There are literally thousands of emission reduction policies
that are available to governments.
Unfortunately, the current government doesn't believe in
acting on them, preferring instead to force the continuation
of burning fossil fuels.
To finish with a personal anecdote, I've been driving
EVs for 10 years and I put solar panels on
my roof four years ago.
My transport is now genuinely zero emissions
and my net domestic energy use is to contribute
to the national grid more than I consume.
So I would recommend the New Zealand government
and bank supported investing in solar
and EVs rather than fossil fuels.
And uh, I thank you for your time.
And would, uh, yeah,
if there's any questions you'd like to add,
Okay. Uh,
any questions for Mr. Baisley?
I look just looking across Andy Foster
is gonna give the voter thanks.
Oh look. Um, thank you very much for that, Rick.
Um, I, I dunno where I wanna start on, on the, the comments
that you made, but, but just in terms
of keeping the lights on, yeah.
Um, the numbers when you look at them, uh, in terms
of our ability to be able to keep the lights on,
particularly during a winter period, are really,
really scary at the moment.
And, and solar's just not gonna do it.
Um, so I don't know, can you just tell us
where you are getting your information that
that is gonna be the answer that is going
to keep the lights on and keep businesses going?
'cause we've had quite a number of
businesses already closed down.
You mentioned, um, you know, no more gas, coal and oil.
Well, the gas, the gas,
Yeah. No more new. No
more new, no more new expiration. Yeah,
We're kind of running out what we've got
already very, very fast.
So just, I'd be interested in your economic prognosis there
as to how we are actually gonna keep the
lights on and businesses running.
Yeah, no, well thank you for that.
I think that's why I used my personal anecdote at the end
that, I mean, I invested in a
solar on my roof four years ago
and I'm now a net, I now don't, I'm a net provider to the,
uh, to the grid.
So if you simply multiply that by, I don't know, three
and a half million New Zealand households
and then all of the businesses that are there,
solar can be installed, I would suggest in the next week,
certainly over the next year.
It's cheap, it's affordable, it's doable.
And you can also add in batteries as well,
which are becoming more affordable.
So it's a cheaper, more available
form of energy than the fossil fuels.
And I'll put that to you. Would you not, would you disagree?
Would you take exception to that or would you agree to that?
Uh, well I, I would point you to the ability to transmit
that around and that's, and that volume,
Well, that's what I'm saying. It's
on, it's, if it's on the rooftops, it's
that is domestic energy use sorted.
And for lots of businesses with warehouses of lot of, uh,
roof space, I mean, I dunno, I, I'm, there's the company,
I dunno is what they're called,
but they've done the analysis of Auckland.
If you fly over South Auckland, you look at all the roof,
the, um, the warehouses and so on.
We don't have to build massive solar farms.
We can, and we can do the wind farms as well,
but we don't have to do that.
We've got the capacity to do it
right on our roofs right now. Mm-hmm.
Okay. We we're, We get another day.
Okay. Th thank you. Uh, we've got, uh, Dr. David Wilson.
Thank you, Rick. Um, I think just just to point out,
there is a small issue in terms of, um, industry
and that it needs process heat
and intense energy to run,
which unfortunately at the moment, solar producing
electricity does not fulfill that purpose.
Um, I know there are some, uh, innovations
around at the moment about how
to convert the electricity into intense heat
and, um, and energy,
but at the moment we're, we've got a bit of an issue there,
but thank you very much for your, um, for your, um,
submission and yeah,
I think more solar on roofs is a really good idea.
Thank you. I mean, I wouldn't disagree
that it's not the answer completely for everything,
but it does.
Yeah. I mean, with the, with the, um,
the, uh, I mean of the six points,
and I just heard the last one from the three 50, the,
that it's unworkable that the idea
that the government can go to a bank
and say, open up all your books for absolute scrutiny,
and then we're gonna tell you that you have to continue
to lend on a fiduciary interest when it could be
absolutely on the margins.
And the bank itself wants to say, well, no, we, we,
we'd rather put our money elsewhere.
Is there anyone like to comment on whether it's
actually a workable bill?
Yeah, I don't wanna get into a discussion,
but yeah, that point's been well made today, Rick,
around the correlation between, um, the ESG
and being counted as a commercial
risk and their considerations.
Yeah, that point's been well made by a number
of submitters, so thank you.
Yeah. Okay. I
Think, I think, we'll, we, we'll leave it there.
Mr. Um, Baisley, we, that's been some good interaction.
We don't, submitters don't normally start asking the MPS
questions, but that was worth, um, hearing, uh,
how they responded.
So thank you for that. We appreciate you
coming on book coming in.
All right. Thank you Mr. Bro.
Thank, thank you. Okay.
Uh, Clark's office, have we got Helma ver Mullan?
Uh, did she ever come back to us? Uh, yes, she back in.
We'll see if it works. Okay.
Can you hear me? Oh, stop it. Helma. Yes.
Yeah. Okay. Oh wow. Okay. This is crystal clear.
You've come out of the gum, you're on the hill.
Okay, we've got five minutes. We've got five minutes.
Gonna be strict on this 'cause I know some members have got
four o'clock appointments
and things, and I'll get in trouble.
So let's go.
I ended my submission with a question,
which I hope you all read.
Do you still believe in sovereignty,
independence, or democracy?
There are four major banks in New Zealand
who handle most loan and credits.
Those banks are run by board members.
They make decisions over people's farms lives
and indirectly, our, and businesses and future mining
or oil and gas explorations, those
38 board members can stifle our bottom up economy.
Those 38 board members who are not democratically elected
by citizens of New Zealand, who work
for a foreign owned bank decide who should succeed
or not, who is deserving of financial stability
or who is not the term they use for valid
and variable commercial reason.
The most common reason for farmers and mining
and gas exploration is climate.
This is political manipulation
and politics has no place in the banking industry.
Those banks with their 38 board members also have or had
or ongoing or in the past indirect investments in China.
China is the world's largest emitters of greenhouse gases.
To me personally, it's a use inconsistency.
If you are really very serious about climate change, to me,
that is about control by bureaucratic overlords
and about an ideological agenda.
It's not unfamiliar that the stopping of loans
and credits is used as an ideological agenda in history
by a sector of those societies
who were not democratically voted in
by the citizens of that country.
The Nuremberg Laws in 1945 in Germany,
apartheid in South Africa, partly prohibited black
and colored people to get loans to enhance their business.
Bank played a major role in fulfilling those agendas.
It is essential that is built past
and stopped the hobbling of our economy
and in the future of New Zealand.
And also, I want to say, um, when I looked up Israel,
Israel has two
and a half million Arabic Israelis who are supposed to have,
have equal rights.
Apparently they can also not get a loan clearly
because they have different ideology as the Jews.
I don't know if that's a completely true
because that conflicting research on this,
but you mostly, you all would agree that that is not right.
And here we are hobbling our farmers,
our mining gas exploration by foreign owned banks,
and that we must never forget,
the debate is about foreign owned banks making an ideology.
And our people cannot go to a bank and enhance their farms
or their guests or, or other businesses
because foreign banks make a decision
in a sovereign country.
This should be altogether wrong, absolutely wrong.
And it should, and I really hope that this bill goes forward
because we need it in New Zealand. Thank you.
Okay, thank you very much. Uh,
I can see now why Mr. Foster
was keen to get you back online.
Hilma keen to get you back online.
Uh, so thank you for finishing us up, uh, uh,
supporting the sponsor on that.
He'll be pleased with that.
We, we, of course, continue to have an open mind.
Mr. Foster, have you, uh, got some closing comments?
Oh, look, I'll just, just make one and,
and I would, I would've said the same for anybody.
Cameron. It's important we have people in front
of us and I would to listen to them.
Um, look, uh, Hilman. Just one, uh, quick question.
You mentioned China, um,
and, um, are you aware that, um, two things.
One is that coal production, uh,
in the world has actually risen to a, a record level.
It's not expected to keep on doing that. Uh, this year Yeah.
Or last year. Yeah. Um,
and that China, um, outweighs,
I think the next 10 countries put together in terms
of its coal production.
Absolutely. I'm so aware of this.
And all those four banks, their firm banks, they do have
or have passed or recent
or indirectly investment into China.
And if they were so serious about climate change,
then they should put news.
They actually should sanction China and not support China
and not start telling us what to do in a country
who has a very lower emission, where we have a very good way
of practicing farming.
Thanks. Okay, let's leave it. Thank you.
Thank you so much for, for staying on the line, Helma,
and, uh, appreciate your attendance today.
Members, uh, that draws a conclusion to this afternoon.
Uh, we won't go into private session
because we have got an opportunity, haven't we,
Clark's office, uh, to, to, uh, to talk to officials
and to inform, uh, uh, things
that we want followed up on in the departmental
report, uh, come Wednesday.
Uh, yes, that's correct. That's so, uh, members, you've got
that chance on Wednesday.
Um, if Mr. Foster wants to.